CARD CATEGORIES

https://wiki.dominionstrategy.com/index.php/Cantrip

Simple cantrips
Dominion: Harbinger, Sentry, Spy
Intrigue: Great Hall, Mill, Pawn
Seaside: Pearl Diver
Alchemy: Familiar
Cornucopia & Guilds: Farrier, Shop
Hinterlands: Highway, Scheme, Trail, Wheelwright
Dark Ages: Cartographer, Market Square, Sir Bailey, Urchin
Adventures: Guide, Page, Ratcatcher
Empires: Groundskeeper, Settlers
Nocturne: Pixie, Zombie Spy
Menagerie: Sanctuary
Allies: Blacksmith, Hill Fort, Innkeeper, Old Map, Sorcerer, Sorceress, Swap, Town Crier, Underling
Rising Sun: Alley. Daimyo, Gold Mine, Snake Witch
Cantrips this turn
These cards are non-terminal draw, village, or Peddler variants but play over multiple turns and only act as cantrips on the turn they are played.

Cabin Boy
Caravan
Caravan Guard
Secret Cave
Conditionally non-terminal draw, village, or peddler variant
These cards can act as non-terminal draw, as a village, or as a Peddler variant under specific circumstances, but act as a simple cantrip otherwise.

Dominion: Merchant
Intrigue: Wishing Well
Seaside: Sea Chart
Alchemy: Apothecary
Cornucopia & Guilds: Hamlet, Herald, Menagerie
Dark Ages: Ironmonger, Vagrant
Adventures: Magpie, Storyteller
Empires: Patrician
Nocturne: Will-o'-Wisp
Renaissance: Seer
Allies: Battle Plan
Rising Sun: Poet
Promos: Sauna
Handsize-decreasing cantrips
These cards provide +1 Card, +1 Action, but mandatorily decrease handsize by trashing, discarding, or setting aside a card from the hand.

Alley — when played from hand.
Haven
Modify — can be a cantrip depending on player choice.
Rats — handsize is not decreased if the player has only Rats in hand.
Upgrade
Sifting cantrips
These cards give +1 Action and put a card into your hand, but offer some sifting rather than just drawing the top card of your deck.

Scrying Pool
Sage
Archive
Border Guard
Miller

-------
-------

https://wiki.dominionstrategy.com/index.php/Non-terminal_draw

Dominion: Laboratory
Seaside: Tide Pools
Alchemy: Alchemist
Dark Ages: Madman
Guilds: Advisor
Adventures: Lost City
Empires: Encampment
Renaissance: Experiment
Menagerie: Destrier, Horse, Way of the Horse
Allies: Distant Shore, Lich, Sibyl
Plunder: Landing Party
Rising Sun: Litter, Root Cellar
Promos: Governor
Conditional effects
These cards are restricted by only being able to increase handsize in certain circumstances; if the condition is not met, most will be simple cantrips, or even reduce handsize.

Intrigue: Wishing Well -- you need to guess the top card of your deck after drawing one card to draw another one.
Alchemy: Apprentice provides net non-terminal draw if you trash a card costing $3 or more.
Prosperity: City -- Only if a supply pile is empty.
Cornucopia: Menagerie -- Only if you have no duplicate cards in hand.
Hinterlands: Stables -- If you can discard a Treasure from your hand.
Adventures: Storyteller -- You need to have $ to spend to increase your handsize.
Adventures: Teacher, Lost Arts, Pathfinding can all upgrade Action cards to draw extra cards or generate extra Actions, generating non-terminal draw from suitable targets.
Empires: City Quarter -- Variable amount of draw. You need at least two other Action cards in hand to increase your handsize.
Nocturne: Cursed Village -- Variable amount of draw. Only increases handsize from a sufficiently small starting handsize.
Allies: Capital City -- You need to have generated $2 before.
Allies: Battle Plan -- If you can reveal an Attack card from your hand.
Plunder: Swamp Shacks -- If you have six or more cards in play.
Plunder: Shy -- only works at the beginning of your turn, and only once per turn.
Rising Sun: Artist -- if you have two or more unique cards in play..
Rising Sun: Rice Broker gives net non-terminal draw if you trash an Action card.
Specific-card drawers
A subset of conditional non-terminal draw. These non-terminal cards only draw cards of a specific type or other category, and increase handsize if they find such cards.

Scout draws Victory cards.
Sea Chart draws a card you already have in play.
Apothecary draws Coppers and Potions.
Scrying Pool draws Actions.
Hunting Party digs for a card not already in your hand.
Vagrant draws certain junk cards.
Magpie draws Treasures.
Settlers draws Coppers from your discard pile.
Bustling Village draws Settlers from your discard pile.
Patrician draws cards costing $5 or more.
Will-o'-Wisp draws cards costing $2 or less.
Seer draws cards costing from $2 to $4.
Hunter draws cards of different types.
Poet draws cards costing $3 or less.
Non-terminal duration draw
These non-terminal cards increase handsize on future turns, not immediately.

Seaside: Caravan
Empires: Archive
Nocturne: Den of Sin, Crypt

-------
-------

https://wiki.dominionstrategy.com/index.php/Terminal_draw

Cards providing +4 Cards or more
Council Room
Envoy — Reveals five cards and discards one, chosen by the next player, before drawing the rest.
Hunting Grounds
Imperial Envoy
Pooka — Only if trashing a Treasure.
Wharf — Draws two cards twice.
Cards providing +3 Cards
Conditional
These cards only draw cards sometimes, usually as a choice.

Aristocrat — Only when playing the second or sixth Aristocrat.
Nobles — One of two choices.
Stronghold — One of two choices. Duration that draws at the start of next turn.
Werewolf — If not played during your Night phase.
Wild Hunt — One of two choices.
Non-conditional
Avanto — Non-terminal if you have a Sauna in hand.
Barge — Duration that gives a choice between drawing when playing or at the start of next turn.
Catacombs — Optionally discards the top three cards of the deck before drawing three.
Crew
Emissary — Non-terminal if you didn't need to shuffle.
Haunted Woods — Duration that draws at the start of next turn.
Highwayman — Duration that draws at the start of next turn.
Journeyman — Allows a named card to be skipped when drawing.
Margrave
Old Witch
Pilgrim — Draws four cards then puts one back on top of the deck.
Rabble
Smithy
Swashbuckler
Torturer
Tragic Hero
Wayfarer
Cards providing +2 Cards
Conditional
These cards only draw cards sometimes, usually as a choice.

Blacksmith — One of several choices.
Courser — One of several choices.
Mercenary — Only draws if you have at least two cards in hand that can be trashed.
Mountain Shrine — Only draws if there are any Action cards in the Trash.
Steward — One of several choices.
Trusty Steed — One of several choices.
Only +2 Cards
These cards only draw two cards and do nothing else when played normally.

Black Cat (on your own turn) — Can as a reaction be played on another player's turn to also do an Attack.
Faithful Hound — Can be set aside when discarded to return to the hand at start of next turn.
Lackeys — Provides Villagers when gained.
Moat — Can as a reaction be revealed to ignore other player's Attacks.
Sheepdog — Can as a reaction be played from hand when gaining a card.
Way of the Otter allows any Action card to be played to only draw two cards.

Small draw with filtering
These cards only provide a total of two cards, but allow some filtering or sifting to help you draw the cards you want.

Adventurer — Reveals cards until finding two Treasures to draw.
Courtyard — Draws three cards then puts one back on top of the deck.
Embassy — Draws five cards then discards three.
Mapmaker — Looks at the top four cards, puts two of them into hand, and discards the rest.
Oracle — Optionally discards the top two cards of the deck before drawing two.
Witch's Hut — Draws four cards then discards two.
Conditionally terminal
These cards are only terminal sometimes.

Cultist — Non-terminal if you have additional Cultists in hand.
Diplomat — Non-terminal if you have fewer than five cards in hand (after drawing).
Imp — Non-terminal if you have any Action card in hand not already in play.
Recruiter — Provides Villagers when played which can be used to make it non-terminal.
Attacks
These cards draws two cards in addition to performing an Attack.

Black Cat (on another player's turn)
Cultist
Followers — Also gains an Estate.
Ghost Ship
Mercenary — Also +$2. Trashes two cards, resulting in a smaller hand.
Ninja — Only draws one card, but since you can play it from outside your hand it has a similar effect to an ordinary +2 cards.
Sea Witch — Also a Duration that draws and discards two cards at the start of your next turn.
Sir Destry
Warrior
Witch
Other additional effects
These cards have additional non-Attack effects.

Figurine — is a Treasure, so formally not a terminal action; but when it is played normally in your Buy phase it does not allow you to play the Actions you draw.
Gear — Sets aside two cards until the start of next turn, resulting in a smaller hand this turn, but the total effect over both turns is to increase the hand.
Masquerade — Allows a card to be trashed, which can result in no increased hand.
Silk Merchant
Vault — Allows cards to be discarded, which can result in a smaller hand.
Variable
Draw-to-x
Certain terminal Actions draw up to a specified handsize. These are especially useful against handsize attacks or other cards that can reduce handsize between turns, and in engines with handsize-reducing components such as Festival and Hamlet.

Library — Up to 7
Watchtower — Up to 6
Jack of All Trades — Up to 5
Way of the Owl — Up to 6
Blacksmith — Up to 6 (one of several choices)
Ronin — Up to 7
Other
Broker — Optionally draws cards depending on the cost of the card it trashes.
Carnival — Draws up to four cards, but can't draw multiple copies of the same card.
Crossroads — Draws cards depending on the number of Victory cards in hand (but is non-terminal the first time it is played each turn).
Guard Dog — Draws four cards if played from a small starting hand, but only two cards if played from a larger hand.
Housecarl — Draws cards equal to the number of differently-named Actions you have in play.
Magnate — Draws a number of cards equal to the number of Treasures in your hand.
Maroon — Draws a number of cards depending on the number of types a trashed card has.
Marquis — Effective handsize increase depends on your starting handsize.
Patrol — Draws three cards plus up to four Victory cards.
Ranger — Draws five cards every other play for an average of 2.5 cards per play.
Royal Blacksmith — Effective handsize increase depends on the amount of Copper in your deck.

-------
-------

https://wiki.dominionstrategy.com/index.php/Curser

Primary cursers
These are Kingdom cards that consistently cause other players to acquire Curses in ways that they do not always have the option to avoid:

Dominion: Witch
Seaside: Sea Hag, Sea Witch
Alchemy: Familiar
Prosperity: Charlatan, Mountebank
Hinterlands: Ill-Gotten Gains
Cornucopia & Guilds: Soothsayer
Renaissance: Old Witch
Menagerie: Coven
Plunder: Siren, Trickster
Circle of Witches, from Allies, is not a Kingdom card itself, but it allows you to use Liaison Kingdom cards as cursers.

Secondary cursers
These cards can cause opponents to gain Curses, but in more restricted circumstances:

Cards that depend on the top card of your opponent's deck:

Intrigue: Swindler—may give a Curse when they reveal a card costing $0, often a Copper.
Cornucopia & Guilds: Jester—gives a Curse when they reveal a Victory card.
Adventures: Giant—gives a Curse when they reveal a card not costing between $3 and $6.
Allies: Barbarian—gives a Curse when they reveal a card not costing $3 or more.
Cards that require a specific condition from the user:

Intrigue: Replace—it only distributes Curses if you gain a Victory card
Hinterlands: Cauldron—only distributes a Curse when you gain your third Action card of the turn
Hinterlands: Witch's Hut—only distributes a Curse if you discard two Action cards
Cornucopia & Guilds: Followers—as this is a Prize, there is only a single copy which is rather difficult to gain.
Empires: Catapult — distributes a Curse only if you trash a card costing $3 or more
Nocturne: Idol — distributes a Curse only if you have an even number of Idols in play
Allies: Sorceress—distributes a Curse only if you can guess what card is on top of your deck
Rising Sun: Kitsune—distributes a Curse as one of several possible options that you can choose between
Rising Sun: Snake Witch—can only distribute a Curse if you have no duplicate cards in hand
Cards whose effect can be avoided by your opponent in some circumstances:

Intrigue: Torturer—your opponent is always free to not take the Curse and discard instead; in games without villages it's relatively likely that few Curses will be distributed by Torturer
Seaside: Blockade—it only distributes Curses to players who gain the same card you chose
Cornucopia & Guilds: Young Witch—your opponent can reveal the Bane to avoid gaining a Curse
Adventures: Swamp Hag — your opponent may avoid gaining a Curse if they choose to buy no cards on their turn
Menagerie: Black Cat—distributes a Curse only when another player gains a Victory card
Allies: Sorcerer—distributes a Curse only to opponents who can't guess what card is on top of their deck.
Other cards that can distribute Curses but are not usually considered cursers
Unlike the primary and secondary cursers which always affect other players, the cards in this category have other primary purposes than handing out Curses or they do not only affect the opponent of the user.

Masquerade (from Intrigue) and Ambassador (from Seaside) can only redistribute Curses after they have been gained through other means.
Seaside: Embargo— is an effect that can sometimes be played around and which also affects the user.
Adventures: Messenger—causes all players to gain a card costing up to $4, which can be a Curse; but it affects the user as well as their opponents and is more likely to be used for something else.
Some effects use gaining Curses as a drawback or penalty to the user:

Nocturne: Cursed Gold
Empires: Ritual
Renaissance: Hideout—gives you a Curse if you trash a Victory card
Menagerie: Desperation
Plunder: Cursed
Rising Sun: Sickness

------
------

https://wiki.dominionstrategy.com/index.php/Throne_Room_variant

Throne Room - double-plays an Action card
King's Court - triple-plays an Action card
Procession - double-plays an Action card, then upgrades it
Disciple - double-plays an Action card, then gains a copy of it
Royal Carriage - replays an Action card after-the-fact, can be saved until needed, and more than one can be used on the same card
Crown - either double-plays an Action card or double-plays a Treasure
Coronet - double-plays an Action and a Treasure
Ghost - digs for an Action card and double-plays it on your next turn
Citadel - replays the first Action card you play on your turn
Scepter - replays an Action card after-the-fact during the Buy phase, more than one can be used on the same card
Mastermind - triple-plays an Action card on your next turn
Specialist - gives you a choice of replaying the Action card or gaining a copy of it; also works on Treasures
Flagship - replays the next Action card you play after it
Reckless - replays a specific Action or Treasure every time you play it, but returns it to the Supply after doing so
Daimyo - draws a card before double-playing an Action
Practice - double-plays an Action during the Buy phase.
Related Effects
Royal Galley - plays the same Action card once now and once on your next turn
Elder - a fringe case: if the Action card you play asks you to "choose one" of several options, Elder allows you to choose two, but it doesn't double other features of the card
First Mate - doesn't let you pay the same Action card multiple times, but lets you play multiple copies of the same Action card.
Prince - plays the same Action card every turn for the rest of the game
Counterfeit, King's Cache, and Tiara can only replay Treasure cards. This is superficially similar to Throne Room variants that double-play Actions, and is subject to the same rules; but the implications are different because Action plays are limited and Treasure plays aren't.

------
------

https://wiki.dominionstrategy.com/index.php/Village_(card_category)

Dominion: Festival, Village
Intrigue: Mining Village, Nobles, Shanty Town
Seaside: Bazaar, Fishing Village, Native Village
Alchemy: University
Prosperity: City, Worker's Village
Cornucopia: Farming Village, Hamlet
Hinterlands: Border Village, Inn
Dark Ages: Bandit Camp, Fortress, Squire, Wandering Minstrel
Guilds: Plaza
Cornucopia & Guilds: Farmhands
Adventures: Coin of the Realm, Lost City, Port
Empires: Bustling Village, City Quarter, Encampment, Villa
Nocturne: Blessed Village, Cursed Village, Ghost Town
Renaissance: Hideout, Mountain Village
Menagerie: Hostelry, Hunting Lodge, Village Green, Way of the Ox
Allies: Capital City, Merchant Camp, Town
Plunder: Harbor Village, Longship, Swamp Shacks, Wealthy Village
Rising Sun: Kitsune, Litter, Rustic Village
Promo: Walled Village

------
------

https://wiki.dominionstrategy.com/index.php/Trasher

Amulet — Two cards (one now and one at start of next turn)
Asceticism — One card per $ spent
Bat — Two cards
Cathedral — One card at start of every turn
Cemetery — On-gain trashing effect, up to four cards
Chapel — Up to four cards
Count — Entire hand
Dame Anna — Up to two cards
Doctor — Up to three cards from the deck, also has a trashing effect as Overpay
Donate — Any number of cards from hand and deck
Forge — Any number of cards
Maelstrom — Exactly three cards
Mercenary — Exactly two cards
Mint — On-gain trashing effect, trashing all non-Duration Treasures in play
Monastery — Dependent on how many cards you gained
Peaceful Cult — One card per Favor spent
Remake — Exactly two cards
River Shrine — Up to two cards
Sauna — Dependent on how many Silvers you play
Sea Trade — Dependent on how many Action cards you have in play
Secluded Shrine — Up to two cards
Sentinel — Up to two cards from your deck
Sentry — Up to two cards from your deck
Sewers — One card when using another trasher
Souk — On-gain trashing effect, up to two cards
Steward — Exactly two cards
Temple — Up to three differently named cards
Trade — Up to two cards
Trading Post — Exactly two cards
Banish can be used to Exile, rather than trash, multiple cards from your hand.

Single-card trashers
These trashers have effects that are independent of the properties of the cards being trashed, and most can trash any card. These have a variety of uses: many are deck thinners or improvers; but for Death Cart, for example, which can only trash Action cards, the trashing is in part a penalty to compensate for the strong +$5 effect.

Copper trashers
These cards are primarily used for trashing Copper: some can only trash Copper, while the others can trash other Treasure cards as well, but do not provide better benefits for trashing more useful Treasures.

Bonfire — can only trash Coppers
Ducat — on-gain trashing effect, can only trash Copper.
Loan
Mint — on-gain effect, while not a single-card trasher, is also best used for trashing Copper.
Moneylender — can only trash Copper
Pooka
Spice Merchant
Treasurer
Trashing Copper is also an important function of Counterfeit and Catapult, though they do give more powerful effects for trashing more valuable (or expensive) Treasures. Monastery targets Copper specifically, but can also trash other cards. Miser removes Coppers from your deck without trashing them.

Estate trashers
These cards can't trash Treasure cards and don't give better benefits for trashing better cards. Therefore in the early game they're most likely to be used for trashing Estates or Shelters specifically; later in the game, they may be used on Curses, Ruins, obsolete early-game Actions, and cards with on-trash benefits.

Acolyte
Jack of All Trades
Hermit
Other limited trashers
These trashers typically give substantial bonuses, but can't trash most junk cards and therefore aren't usually an effective source of thinning.

Advance — Actions
Death Cart — Actions
Small Castle — Castles
Woodworkers' Guild — Actions
Zombie Apprentice — Actions
Can trash any card
These cards allow a card to be trashed but any other effects happen regardless of whether a card is actually trashed.

Altar
Crystal Ball — The top card from your deck
Church
The Flame's Gift
Forager
Goat
Goatherd
Hideout — Gains a Curse if the trashed card is a Victory.
Infirmary
Investment
Junk Dealer
Lookout — One of the three top cards from your deck
Masquerade
Mountain Shrine
Pious
Plan
Priest
Prize Goat
Ratcatcher
Rats
Rope
Sailor
Scrounge
Shaman
Trade Route
Way of the Goat
Other
Bishop — Allows other players to also trash a card, but without any benefit.
Gladiator — Copies of itself from the Supply
Lurker — Action cards from the Supply
Salt the Earth — Victory cards from the Supply.
Watchtower — Can be revealed to trash gained cards. Although not unusally considered a trasher, it is useful as a defens against junkers and as a way of activating cards' on-trash effects instantaneously.

------
------

https://wiki.dominionstrategy.com/index.php/Alt-VP

Scaling Victory cards
These are Victory cards whose  VP value is dependent on the contents of your deck. Many of them can enable strategies that ignore Provinces altogether, while focusing on building your deck instead in such a way as to obtain the alt-VP cards and maximize their value.

Demesne — 1 VP per Gold
Duke — 1 VP per Duchy
Fairgrounds — 2 VP per five differently named cards
Feodum — 1 VP per three Silvers
Gardens — 1 VP per ten cards
Humble Castle — 1 VP per Castle
King's Castle — 2 VP per Castle
Marchland — 1 VP per three Victory cards
Pasture — 1 VP per Estate
Silk Road — 1 VP per four Victory cards
Territory — 1 VP per differently named Victory card
Vineyard — 1 VP per three Actions
Several Landmarks also provide  VP scaled based on a feature of your deck; in these cases the scoring is automatic, without making you gain Victory cards to access it: Keep, Museum, Obelisk, Orchard, Palace, Tower, and Triumphal Arch. Plateau Shepherds, an Ally, works similarly.

Functional Victory cards
These are Kingdom Victory cards whose  VP value is constant and rather small, but they have other functions as Action, Treasure, or Reaction cards which may help in improving or maintaining a deck's efficiency or scoring ability. A deck that contains these cards can afford to get fewer of the basic Victory cards, since a score bonus is as it were already built into the engine.

Dame Josephine
Demesne
Distant Lands
Distant Shore
Farm
Great Hall
Humble Castle
Island
Mill
Nobles
Opulent Castle
Pasture
Small Castle
Stronghold
Tunnel
Victory cards with bonuses
These Victory cards come with bonuses when you gain or trash them, even though they have no use while in your deck, incentivizing gaining them in circumstances when you might not otherwise want to add dead cards to your deck.

Cemetery
Crumbling Castle
Farmland
Feodum
Grand Castle
Haunted Castle
Marchland
Sprawling Castle
Territory
Victory tokens
Several cards in Prosperity and Empires can grant victory tokens. These are a form of  VP which adds to your score without being tied to cards in your deck.

Prosperity: Bishop, Collection, Goons, Investment, Monument
Empires: Chariot Race, Conquest, Crumbling Castle, Dominate, Emporium, Farmers' Market, Grand Castle, Groundskeeper, Plunder, Ritual, Sacrifice, Salt the Earth, Temple, Triumph, Wedding, Wild Hunt, and many of the Landmarks
Way of the Worm is not formally an alt-VP effect since the  VP you get from it come from Estates, but since the Estates never have to end up in your deck, it resembles a  VP-token ability.

------
------

https://wiki.dominionstrategy.com/index.php/%2BBuy


Terminal coin or the equivalent
Dominion: Woodcutter
Intrigue: Baron, Bridge
Alchemy: Herbalist
Prosperity: Goons
Hinterlands: Nomad Camp, Nomads, Souk
Dark Ages: Squire, Storeroom
Cornucopia & Guilds: Horse Traders, Merchant Guild
Adventures: Bridge Troll, Messenger, Peasant, Wine Merchant
Empires: Farmers' Market
Nocturne: Sacred Grove
Menagerie: Way of the Monkey
Allies: Herb Gatherer, Town
Rising Sun: Fishmonger
Terminal draw
Dominion: Council Room
Seaside: Wharf
Hinterlands: Margrave
Adventures: Ranger
Nocturne: Tragic Hero
Renaissance: Silk Merchant
Menagerie: Barge
Allies: Marquis
Rising Sun: Imperial Envoy
Cantrip
Dominion: Market
Prosperity: Grand Market, Worker's Village
Dark Ages: Market Square
Cornucopia & Guilds: Farrier, Hamlet
Menagerie: Sanctuary, Snowy Village
Rising Sun: Gold Mine
Treasures and other non-terminal stop cards
Dominion: Festival
Seaside: Astrolabe
Prosperity: Collection, Tiara
Hinterlands: Cauldron
Dark Ages: Counterfeit
Cornucopia & Guilds: Candlestick Maker
Empires: Capital, Charm, Fortune, Villa
Renaissance: Ducat, Spices
Menagerie: Stockpile
Plunder: Buried Treasure, Jewelled Egg, Mining Road, Rope, Sack of Loot
Loot cards: Amphora, Endless Chalice, Jewels, Orb, Prize Goat, Puzzle Box, Sextant, Shield, Staff, Sword
Rising Sun: Good Harvest, Rice
+Buy with a choice of other options
Intrigue: Courtier, Pawn
Nocturne: Druid
Allies: Bauble
Other
Skulk gives +Buy with a Hex attack
Travelling Fair can transfer arbitrary amounts of $ into +Buy
Seaway and Teacher can give +Buy to an Action card pile in the Supply.
League of Shopkeepers can give you +Buy when you play a Liaison.
Flourishing Trade can convert excess +Actions into +Buy
Cards that give restricted +Buy
Cards that need to trash a card
Some cards need to trash or return a card, so they may not be sustainable in the long term as a source of +Buy.

Seaside: Salvager
Prosperity: Trade Route
Hinterlands: Spice Merchant
Dark Ages: Forager
Menagerie: Scrap
Rising Sun: Panic
Limited amounts of +Buy
Some cards are difficult to come by, only exist in very limited numbers, or only provide a limited quanitity of +Buy in normal circumstances.

Seaside: Tactician
Dark Ages: Ruined Market, Sir Martin
Cornucopia & Guilds: Demesne, Princess, Renown
Nocturne: The Forest's Gift, Pouch
Renaissance: Fair
Rising Sun: Aristocrat
Other restrictions
Some cards only give +Buy later during the game when one or more piles have emptied.

Prosperity: City
Menagerie: Animal Fair
Contraband can prevent you from buying certain cards.

Some effects need you to to gain specific kinds of cards to get +Buy:

Allies: Band of Nomads, Galleria
Plunder: Abundance
Figurine only gives you +Buy if you have an Action card in hand to discard.

Giving back Buys
Forum, Cavalry, Marchland, and Nearby cards give +Buy when gained. Similarly, Villa can be played instantly after being gained and so gives back a Buy.

A number of Events do not use up a Buy because they give one back whenever bought.

Adventures: Borrow, Save, Scouting Party
Empires: Delve
Menagerie: Desperation, Gamble, Pursue, Toil
Plunder: Avoid, Bury, Deliver, Launch, Mirror, Rush
Rising Sun: Continue

------
------

https://wiki.dominionstrategy.com/index.php/Deck_inspector

Sifters
These reveal cards, discard some of them, and put the rest back.

Cartographer — Looks at four. Discards any number.
Crystal Ball — Looks at one. May trash, discard, or play it.
Duchess — Looks at one. May discard it. Also lets other players do the same.
Forest Dwellers — Looks at three. Discards any number.
Ironmonger — Looks at one. May discard it.
Jack of All Trades — Looks at one. May discard it.
Lookout — Looks at three. Trashes one, discards one, and puts one back.
Navigator — Looks at five. Discards all or none.
Night Watchman — Looks at five. Discards any number.
Oracle — Reveals two. Discards all or none.
Scouting Party — Looks at five. Discards three.
Sentry — Looks at two. Trashes and/or discards any number.
Sextant — Looks at five. Discards any number.
Spy — Reveals one. May discard it.
The Sun's Gift — Looks at four. Discards any number.
Survivors — Looks at two. Discards all or none.
Wandering Minstrel — Reveals three. Discards all non-Actions.
Zombie Spy — Looks at one. May discard it.
Conditional draw
These reveal cards and put some of them into your hand. The rest are put back.

Apothecary — Reveals four. Puts Coppers and Potions into hand.
Magpie — Reveals one. Puts a Treasure into hand.
Mystic — Reveals one. Puts it into hand if correctly named before revealing.
Patrician — Reveals one. Puts into hand if costing $5 or more.
Patrol — Reveals four. Puts Victories and Curses into hand.
Poet — Reveals one. Puts into hand if costing $3 or less.
Pursue — Reveals four. Puts all into hand correctly named before revealing.
Scout — Reveals four. Puts all Victories into hand.
Scrying Pool — Reveals one and may discard it. Then reveals cards until finding a non-Action and puts all into hand.
Seer — Reveals three. Puts all into hand costing between $2 and $4.
Vagrant — Reveals one. Puts into hand if Curse, Ruins, Shelter, or Victory.
Will-o'-Wisp — Reveals one. Puts into hand if costing $2 or less.
Wishing Well — Reveals one. Puts into hand if correcty named before revealing.
Trashers
These trash cards directly from the deck.

Crystal Ball — Looks at one. May trash, discard, or play it.
Doctor — Reveals three. Trashes all named before revealing.
Lookout — Looks at three. Trashes one and discards one.
Sentinel — Looks at five. Trashes up to two.
Sentry — Looks at two. Trashes and/or discards any number.
Playing cards
These play cards directly from the deck, normally with some condition.

Crystal Ball — Looks at one. May trash, discard, or play it.
Fortune Hunter — Looks at three. Optionally plays a Treasure.
Herald — Reveals one. Plays an Action.
Piazza — Reveals one. Plays an Action.

------
------

https://wiki.dominionstrategy.com/index.php/Trash_for_benefit

List of cards
See Remodelers for cards that gain cards based on a trashed card's cost.

Scaling with the trashed card's cost
Apprentice — +1 Card per $1 and +2 Card per P
Bishop — +1 VP per $2
Broker — +1 Attack, +1 Card, +$1, or +1 Favor per $1
Crucible — +$1 per $1
Raze — Looks at a card per $1 and choose one to put into hand
Recruiter — +1 Villager per $1
Research — Sets aside a card per $1 to put into hand at start of next turn
Ritual — +1 VP per $1
Salvager — +$1 per $1
Scrap — A choice of different effects per $1
Trader — Gain a Silver per $1
Non-scaling effects based on cost
Catapult — Performs a cursing attack if the trashed card costs $3 or more.
Pickaxe — Gains a Loot if the trashed card costs $3 or more.
Other effects
These effects are based on the trashed card's type or other properties, rather than its cost.

Catapult — Performs a handsize attack if the trashed card is a Treasure.
Counterfeit — Plays the trashed Treasure twice, effectively doubling its value.
Maroon — +2 Cards per number of types of the trashed card.
Rice Broker — Draws a different number of cards depending on the trashed card's type.
Sacrifice — Effect depends on the trashed card's type.
Student — Gains a Favor and top-decks itself if the trashed card is a Treasure.
Transmute — Gains different cards based on the trashed card's type.

------
------

https://wiki.dominionstrategy.com/index.php/Handsize_attack

Down to 3 cards:

Berserker
Catapult — Only if trashing a Treasure.
Cutthroat
Followers
Footpad
Ghost Ship — Cards are topdecked instead of discarded.
Goons
Legionary — Only attacks if a Gold is revealed. Discards down to two cards and then draws one.
Margrave — Draws a card before discarding down to three.
Mercenary — Only attacks if two cards are trashed.
Militia
Ninja
Poverty
Samurai
Sir Michael
Skirmisher — Only attacks when an attack card is gained.
Down to 4 cards:

Frigate — Every time another player plays an Action card until the start next turn.
Minion — Only attacks as one of two choices. Discards entire hand and draws four cards.
Sword
Urchin
Stackable handsize attacks
These attacks can be repeated and continue to reduce players' handsize after the first play. These attacks either target specific cards, and will not continue reducing handsize if a player has none of the targeted cards in hand, or they still have a limit that prevents the handsize from dropping below a certain number.

Bureaucrat — targets Victory cards
Clerk — causes opponents to top-deck 1 card, but not if they have fewer than 5 cards in hand.
Cutpurse — targets Coppers
Fear — causes opponents to discard 1 Action or Treasure card, but not if they have fewer than 5 cards in hand.
Haunting — causes opponents to top-deck 1 card, but not if they have fewer than 4 cards in hand.
Maelstrom — causes opponents to trash 1 card from their hand, but not if they have fewer than 5 cards in hand.
Soldier — causes opponents to discard 1 card, but not if they have fewer than 4 cards in hand.
Torturer — has no limit whatsoever on the number of cards that can be discarded but the victim always has the choice of discarding or not; it allows a player to gain a Curse instead even if Curses have run out.
Villain — causes opponents to discard 1 card costing $2 or more, but not if they have fewer than 5 cards in hand.
Attacker's choice
These cards target a specific card (or cards) of the attacker's choice to discard, but do not affect players with fewer than 5 cards in hand:

Archer
Pillage
Raider
Taxman